A few years ago, this was a big rage on Netflix.
Orange is the new black!
That “new black” is a reference to fashion
clothing.
Black is a colour that goes with any other
color!
Orange?
The color of jail-uniform.
You may have heard of this too — Data is
the new Oil!
Once upon a time, they used to say “Oil
is the new Gold”.
And, now, if you have data, you are almost
all-powerful, that is the message of that
phrase.
Data, is the new oil!
This one, our Seth Godin called it “Small
is the new big!”
He said startups today can actually, … really
thumb their nose at a very large enterprise..
With agility!
He penned a full book on that philosophy!
Recently though, I came across this book.
This book is called The Book of Beautiful
Questions.
And, guess what the message of this book is?!
Mr Warren Berger, the author, says:- “Questions
are the new answers!”
Shocked?
Shall we explore it a bit more?
Namaste!
Four hundred and twenty one!
The King of Questions.
Or the Queen!
We have talked in quite a few episodes about
Questioning and the importance of it.
But there were a few things that I wanted
to dwell deeper on, and that is what we are
going to do today!
Are you able to make sense of these words
here?
Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi!
Yes, Harry Potter, the first book, the Sorcerer’s
Stone!
In that book, there is a mirror that is featured.
The Mirror of Erised.
And, it doesn’t just show an image of whoever
stands in front of them, but, instead, shows
their deepest desires, what they wish for
deep in their heart.
But, I remember something from this scene
that is EVEN MORE lovable than this beautiful
plot twist.
A conversation.
Between Dumbledore and Harry Potter.
“Professor Dumbledore, Can I ask you something?”
And the professor would respond with, “Didn’t
you notice?
You’ve already done that!”
(There is a question sitting right there in
the “Can I”, you see!)
“But, my dear, you may ask me one more question!”
Whenever I recall that scene, I tell myself,
this is the most important task for any teacher
towards their student!
To encourage the student to ask one more question!
It’s almost as if Dumbledore is giving Harry
the permission for lifelong learning!
Ask One More!
That scene is etched in my mind!
There is a famous website called Stackoverflow.
Many programmers, developers, engineers, visit
it regularly!
It is almost as if it is their internal Google.
If Stackoverflow is down, these guys may even
want to take a break, they will feel like
their arms are tied behind their back!
Such a website!
Why is it so important?
Well, this is like Quora, you can ask any
question in tech-matters, and you are likely
to get a good answer, very soon.
There are many answering sites like this one,
but why is Stackoverflow so famous?
The answer lies in the community.
The way they have set it up, they even have
a set of guidelines on how to ask good questions!
When I look at those guidelines, I get the
feeling that these are more generally applicable
too..
They can be used as guidelines for asking
questions in real life too!
Just take a look at these!
The first guideline?
Provide a context!
If you are going to ask something of somebody,
give them the context.
Why, who, when, where, what, … How did that
question come up?
Give them that context.
What domain, what surrounding environment,
is this question a central part of?
The person you are targeting must first understand
that!
Don’t just hit them like a bolt from the
blue!
The second requirement we have is, “Tell
us why you are asking that question!”
That is because, more often than not, newcomers,
beginners, newbies, they ask questions that
don’t actually require just an answer…
the answerer has to spend time wondering why
such a question came up in the first place,
and try answering the bigger problem “upstream”.
Sometimes, the question has to be unasked,
they say!
So, tell us why you are asking that this question,
because, sometimes, we may have to drill deeper,
bark up the tree, and fix it for you.
And then, they say, Share the Research!
“Where all did you go before coming here?
What doors did you try knocking down?
What responses did you get there?
What attempts did you make?
What didn’t apply?
What results did you see?
What went wrong?”
Why are they asking this?
Why are they asking you to tell what went
wrong and what else you tried before coming
to them?
That’s because they want you to earn the
right to ask a question.
In Stackoverflow, you can’t just sign up,
and start asking a question!
You need to earn your chops!
You are wasting my time, aren’t you?
I am an answerer..
You are wasting my time, and so, have you
spent an equivalent amount of time trying
to get at the answer yourself?
Give me proof!
Are you able to see that some of these can
actually be applied to real life too?
If you want to broaden the scope that we just
saw from Stackoverflow, you can go to a book
titled “The Art of Asking!”
In that book, the author talks about seven
things you need to check, through introspection,
before asking the question.
What are those seven things?
What data are you going in search of?
What is it you are looking for?
And.., are you specific enough?
Are you on a fishing expedition or are you
here, looking for this, because of this, … are
you specific?
Then, are you specific as well about the time?
I need it by this time..
If I get it AFTER this timeline, it is as
good as useless…This is the reason I need
it by this time, etc..
Is there a timeliness to it..?
Should you have asked this question earlier?
Or should you have waited for a better opportunity
for this question to be asked?
These are questions you need to ask yourself?
Who are you asking it to?
Is this the person who owns the answer?
Is this the person or group of persons who
are the right people to answer it for you?
Don’t shoot the messenger — remember?!
What are the implications?
Because you have asked this question, what
are the side-effects?
What are the after-effects?
Did you spend some thought before asking this
question?
How about, what manner you are adopting to
ask this question?
There are SO MANY different ways to ask the
same thing!
How was the movie? — is a neutral question.
Wasn’t it amazing?
— Is a loaded way to ask it.
It was no good, was it?
— Is a pre-loaded negative question!
Are you asking it the right way?
And finally, this is my clincher…
what is the response you have for a kind of
answer that might come!?
If the person says I don’t know, do you
have a response?
If the person gives an answer, which doesn’t
look like a good answer, what is your response?
That.. those are the seven things you need
to keep in mind.
You need to ask yourself!
When we talk about “asking yourself”,
I am reminded of this MacGuffin Quotidian
we did — in Q322.
Kuberakkuppai.
The MacGuffin.
In it, we talked about something unique and
specific called Rubberducking.
What is that?
Well, if you are planning to approach a genius,
or an expert, or a busy person, before you
go with your question… a professor even
implemented this as an experiment, outside
his office room..
Before you reach his desk, there is another
desk where there is a rubber duck or a teddy
bear.
The student or the person in the quest for
the answer, is supposed to sit at the desk,
look at the rubber duck, and tell the problem
to the duck!
Does it look insulting??
Nope!
It respects you, it respects the expert, because
the answer comes out, more often than not!
During the time you take to explain it carefully
to the duck, .. you will stop halfway, for
suddenly you are going to realise that the
answer has dawned on you!
And, there are scientific explanations too,
why rubberducking really works!
There are four reasons!
One, you tend to slow down when you talk.
When you verbalise.
Thoughts run very fast!
They are the horses of your imagination.
But, speech?
They are tortoises in comparison.
They will move very slowly.
When you slow yourself down, because the mouth
and the tongue is slowing your play of words
coming from your thoughts, automatically,
remember System II thinking from Daniel Kahneman?
That takes over, and System II, we all know,
is the subconscious.
Much smarter!
And answers that have been staring us in our
face all along, answers that have been ignored
till now, will finally come in front of you!
Secondly, there is this ELI5 effect.
Explain Like I’m Five effect.
To a little child, without using any jargon,
when you make it dead simple, you realise
the answer is actually hidden in the words
of your question.
When talking to an expert, you don’t do
that.
You don’t oversimplify.
The third reason is, you are talking to a
computer!
And, that is why, when you are facing a programming
bug, you are stuck.. unable to solve it.
What is the point talking to a human being
about a problem that came up when you were
talking to a computer?!
Talk to another inanimate object instead!
That is another reason why it works.
Talking to an inanimate object…
what is the biggest benefit in doing so?
They don’t interrupt you!
Most of the time, when you talk, the other
person is waiting for an opportunity to talk.
The other person is waiting to find mistakes
in the way you talk!
When you talk to a rubber duck, it has infinite
patience, it is listening to you, and it is
ready to make you spill the answer yourself!
So, these are the four reasons why they say
rubberducking works so well!
So, probably, before you go out with a question,
go IN, with that question!
Seth Godin, in this book — This is Marketing
— has this to say.
He says, “People don’t want what you make…
(I hope you remember the quarter-inch-drill-bit!)
That’s not what they are coming to you for!
They are coming to you for loftier emotions.
Like?
Like belonging, connection, peace of mind,
status symbols,..
You need to look at your product as simply
a vehicle or a device to trigger those emotions
in your customer’s mind.
So, don’t get lost in the tactics.
Losing sight of the true interest the customer
has!”
And, he goes on to say, “Ask these two questions
all the time, about the product you are building.
Simple straightforward questions.
Who is it for?
And, what does it do for them?”
A few days ago, on Whatsapp, I received this
interesting message.
You must have seen it too.
Policemen in Netherlands.
In Eindhoven.
Do you remember?
A story accompanied this photo.
The story went thus:- “After a woman was
taken to the hospital with hypoglycemia (low
blood sugar), two policemen stayed behind
to prepare dinner for the five kids who were
still in the house.
Afterwards, they also did the dishes.”
The policemen could have thought, “My job?
I am
a policeman, I am here to chase thieves, and
maintain law and order..”
Who am I for?
What does it do for them?
— Those two questions from Seth Godin.
If they had deliberated deeply about it, they
may have arrived at..
“Who am I?
I am here to protect and to serve.
What is “protect”?
Doesn’t mean one needs protection only when
there’s a knife to the neck!
Protect can also mean a life-threatening health
situation with nobody else around to help!
That is Protect too.
Children!
Providing dinner for them!
That is to Serve.
Cleaning the dishes!
Probably Serve!
So, ask those two questions — Who is it
for?
What does it do for them?
If you look at a Teacher-Student relationship,
there are three levels again, in questioning.
At the first level, the ANSWER is important.
Square root of two — If that question is
asked, the answer..
So, those kinds of questions are asked because
the answer is important.
The second level is the kind of question that
is asked because the QUESTION is important.
If the square root of 16 is 4, and the square
root of 4 is 2, .. what is the square root
of 2… suddenly the question becomes important.
Why?
It is not a proper nice fraction.
It is irrational.
When that thought strikes you, you are dragged
in the direction of, “Hey, What is irrationality?!”
So, here, the question is more important than
the fifth decimal after the decimal point
in the expansion of the square root of two.
Is it not?
There is a third level.
And, the third level is the kind of question
that is asked because the PROCESS of questioning
is important..
Question everything!
It is the person who asks SUCH questions goes
on to the square root of zero, and asks, what
is the square root of -1??!
So, question everything, is what leads to
true wisdom!
If we hook these back to our favourite words,
Questions asked because the ANSWER is important
— is the WHAT.
What is the square root of sixteen?
Questions asked because the QUESTION is important
— is the WHY.
Why are irrational numbers different from
rational ones?
Questions asked because the PROCESS is important
— is the HOW.
Where the aim is only to ask questions, and
hope clarity arrives.
On Netflix, there is this beautiful series
called Tales by Light.
Photographers talk about their various adventures.
There is a particular episode titled Himalaya.
In The Himalayas, in Bhutan, monks, Buddhist
monks, how they improve their understanding,
how they expand their learning about Buddhism,
is beautifully picturised.
It almost looks like they are fighting, doesn’t
it?
A monk is seated.
Another is standing in front of them.
They argue about complex concepts.
Simple philosophies.
And, what is so beautiful is, after this session
is over, they change places.
Whoever was talking FOR a particular topic,
takes a completely different viewpoint, and
starts fighting against!
A great way to lower your ego, the senior
monks say!
The process.
The act of Questioning.
Asking because ASKING is important.
Not because I am in search of anything else.
Asking is what I believe is my guide.
If I do that, I am confident that freedom
and deliverance await me on the other side!
Closing thought.
This guy, Warren Berger, has written two books.
One, we already saw, The Book of Beautiful
Questions.
But, before that one, he had written another.
A More Beautiful Question.
Some questions that were asked in the “More
Beautiful Question” book, required explaining.
And, that’s why I wrote the second book,
the author says.
In the foreword for the books, he makes a
comment: “There is an entomologist…
He researches about insects and flies.
Then, there is an archaeologist..
She researches about old buildings and artifacts.
But… questions?
Is there a person who researches them?
Is there a term for such people?
Nope.
Couldn’t find any.
So, I decided to concoct a word all by myself.
I decided to call myself a Questionologist.”
He closes by saying, (and it pains me to hear
it!):- “I called myself the Questionologist.
And started going around with a visiting card
saying that.
I started printing books that introduced me
with that title.
But, guess what?
Nobody asked me why I was calling myself a
Questionologist!”
What a problem!!
Let us meet again next week!
Thank you!